content/posts/sous-vide-pinto-beans.md, before:

---
title: "Sous Vide Pinto Beans"
date: 2024-01-09T17:09:24+01:00
# weight: 
# aliases: []
tags: ["Sous Vide", "TexMex"]
# author: "Me"
# author: ["Author1", "Author2"] # for multiple authors
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: true
description: "Sous Vide Pinto Beans"
canonicalURL: ""
disableHLJS: false # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
ShowWordCount: true
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: false
UseHugoToc: false
cover:
    image: "" # image path/url
    alt: "" # alt text
    caption: "" # display caption under cover
    relative: false # when using page bundles set this to true
    hidden: false # only hide on current single page
---

As a transplanted Texan native living in Netherlands, I've been missing good TexMex style pinto beans. Of course we can get them in a can, or pressure cook them, however, I wanted to try something new and decided to try to sous vide them. The folks at [Polyscience Culinary][polyscience-link] suggest a broad range for cooking legumes sous vide, and [Anova Culinary][anova-link] offers their take on no-soak beans. Striking a balance between these recommendations, I decided to take a middle path, opting for the traditional approach of soaking my beans overnight, which is thought to help with digestibility and even cooking. Then, I cooked them at a precise 87°C for 6 hours, aiming for that perfect creamy texture.

Here's how I prepared my sous vide pinto beans:

**Ingredients**
- 173 grams (1 cup) dried pinto beans, soaked overnight in water
- 1/2 a medium red onion, cut in half
- 3 cloves of garlic, smashed and peeled
- 1 bay leaf (remember it next time!)

**Instructions**
1. After soaking the beans overnight, drain and rinse them in fresh water.
2. Preheat your sous vide machine to 87°C.
3. Place the beans, onion, garlic, and bay leaf in a large glass jar, sealing it tightly.
4. Submerge the jar in the water bath and let it cook for 6 hours.
5. Carefully remove the jar, open it, and serve the beans with your favorite TexMex accompaniments.

{{< img "souvide-beans.jpeg" "An image showing a jar of pinto beans submerged in a sous vide water bath. The beans appear tender and well-cooked, visible through the clear glass jar, which is sealed with a metal clamp-down lid. Bubbles cling to the sides of the jar, indicating the cooking process. The water bath container is placed on a kitchen countertop, with a white towel underneath it and kitchen tiles in the background." >}}

{{< img "enchiladas-beans-rice.jpg" "A close-up image of a plated meal, showing a generous portion of sous vide pinto beans alongside golden-brown Mexican rice and a cheese-covered enchilada. The pinto beans are plump and appear tender, nestled in a savory sauce. The enchilada is smothered in melted cheese and browned to perfection, and the rice is speckled with flecks of green herbs. The dish is served on a white plate set against a dark-toned background, creating an inviting contrast that emphasizes the vibrant colors of this TexMex meal." >}}

Overall I'd say they turned out great. Super creamy and worked perfectly with some home made salsa. Next time I'll try the 1% salt solution and try to remember the bay leaf. 

[polyscience-link]: https://www.recipes.polyscienceculinary.com/recipe/master-technique-cooking-legumes-sous-vide/
[anova-link]: https://recipes.anovaculinary.com/recipe/sous-vide-no-soak-beans

Commit message:

including 1% soaking and cooking instructions

content/posts/sous-vide-pinto-beans.md, after:

---
title: "Sous Vide Pinto Beans"
date: 2024-01-09T17:09:24+01:00
# weight: 
# aliases: []
tags: ["Sous Vide", "TexMex"]
# author: "Me"
# author: ["Author1", "Author2"] # for multiple authors
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: true
description: "Sous Vide Pinto Beans"
canonicalURL: ""
disableHLJS: false # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
ShowWordCount: true
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: false
UseHugoToc: false
cover:
    image: "" # image path/url
    alt: "" # alt text
    caption: "" # display caption under cover
    relative: false # when using page bundles set this to true
    hidden: false # only hide on current single page
---

As a transplanted Texan native living in Netherlands, I've been missing good TexMex style pinto beans. Of course we can get them in a can, or pressure cook them, however, I wanted to try something new and decided to try to sous vide them. The folks at [Polyscience Culinary][polyscience-link] suggest a broad range for cooking legumes sous vide, and [Anova Culinary][anova-link] offers their take on no-soak beans. Striking a balance between these recommendations, I decided to take a middle path, opting for the traditional approach of soaking my beans overnight, which is thought to help with digestibility and even cooking. Then, I cooked them at a precise 87°C for 6 hours, aiming for that perfect creamy texture.

Here's how I prepared my sous vide pinto beans:

**Ingredients**
- 173 grams (1 cup) dried pinto beans, soaked overnight in water 
- 1/2 a medium red onion, cut in half
- 3 cloves of garlic, smashed and peeled
- 1 bay leaf (remember it next time!)

**Instructions**
1. Prepare a 1% saltwater solution for soaking the beans. To do this, dissolve 5 grams of salt in 495 grams of water.
2. Place the dried pinto beans in a small bowl and cover them with the saltwater solution. Cover and soak overnight.
3. After soaking the beans overnight, drain them but do not rinse. Prepare a fresh 1% saltwater solution using the same ratio (5 grams of salt in 495 grams of water) for cooking.
4. Preheat your sous vide machine to 87°C.
5. Place the beans, onion, garlic, and bay leaf in a large glass jar, sealing it tightly.
6. Submerge the jar in the water bath and let it cook for 6 hours.
7. Carefully remove the jar, open it, and serve the beans with your favorite TexMex accompaniments.

{{< img "souvide-beans.jpeg" "An image showing a jar of pinto beans submerged in a sous vide water bath. The beans appear tender and well-cooked, visible through the clear glass jar, which is sealed with a metal clamp-down lid. Bubbles cling to the sides of the jar, indicating the cooking process. The water bath container is placed on a kitchen countertop, with a white towel underneath it and kitchen tiles in the background." >}}

{{< img "enchiladas-beans-rice.jpg" "A close-up image of a plated meal, showing a generous portion of sous vide pinto beans alongside golden-brown Mexican rice and a cheese-covered enchilada. The pinto beans are plump and appear tender, nestled in a savory sauce. The enchilada is smothered in melted cheese and browned to perfection, and the rice is speckled with flecks of green herbs. The dish is served on a white plate set against a dark-toned background, creating an inviting contrast that emphasizes the vibrant colors of this TexMex meal." >}}

Overall I'd say they turned out great. Super creamy and worked perfectly with some home made salsa. Next time I'll try the 1% salt solution and try to remember the bay leaf. 

[polyscience-link]: https://www.recipes.polyscienceculinary.com/recipe/master-technique-cooking-legumes-sous-vide/
[anova-link]: https://recipes.anovaculinary.com/recipe/sous-vide-no-soak-beans
