---
title: "Efficient Thread Dump Extraction with AWK for Java Application Performance Troubleshooting"
date: 2024-05-15T07:15:32+02:00
# weight: 
# aliases: []
tags: ["Java", "Performance", "AWK"]
# author: "Me"
# author: ["Author1", "Author2"] # for multiple authors
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: true
description: "A guide to efficiently extract thread dumps from catalina.out using AWK for performance analysis in Java applications."
canonicalURL: ""
disableHLJS: false # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
ShowWordCount: true
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: false
UseHugoToc: false
cover:
    image: "" # image path/url
    alt: "" # alt text
    caption: "" # display caption under cover
    relative: false # when using page bundles set this to true
    hidden: false # only hide on current single page
---

## Introduction

When working on performance issues in Java applications, one often needs to analyze thread dumps. In tightly controlled environments you may not have access to any of the default tools to generate the thread dumps like [`jstack`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/tools/unix/jstack.html). In this case, typically these dumps are generated by sending a `kill -3` signal to the Java process, appending the output to `catalina.out`. This blog post describes an efficient method to extract these thread dumps using an AWK script, making the analysis process smoother and faster.

## Taking Thread Dumps with `kill -3`

In production environments where you may not have access to tools like `jstack`, you can generate a thread dump by sending a `SIGQUIT` signal using the `kill -3` command. Here’s how to do it:

1. **Identify the Java process ID (PID):** Use the `ps` command to find the PID of the Java process running your application.
   ```bash
   ps aux | grep java
   ```

2. **Send the kill -3 signal:**
    ```bash
   kill -3 <PID>
    ```

## Extracting Thread Dumps with AWK

The `catalina.out` file usually contains other runtime logging, making it cumbersome to isolate thread dumps manually. To streamline the extraction process, you can use the following AWK script. This script identifies and isolates thread dumps into separate files, making it easier to analyze them.

## Script Overview

Below is the AWK script that accomplishes this task. It’s designed to optimize file handling operations, making it fast even with very large `catalina.out` files.

```bash
awk '/^[0-9]{4}-[0-9]{2}-[0-9]{2} [0-9]{2}:[0-9]{2}:[0-9]{2}$/ {
if(td) close(outFile);
n++; td=1;
outFile=("jira_threads." sprintf("%06d", n) ".txt");
}
td { print $0 >> outFile; }
/object space/ && lastLine ~ /PSPermGen/ { td=0; }
{ lastLine=$0; }' catalina.out
```

For convenience, here’s a one-liner version of the same script:

```
awk '/^[0-9]{4}-[0-9]{2}-[0-9]{2} [0-9]{2}:[0-9]{2}:[0-9]{2}$/ { if(td) close(outFile); n++; td=1; outFile=("jira_threads." sprintf("%06d", n) ".txt"); } td { print $0 >> outFile; } /object space/ && lastLine ~ /PSPermGen/ { td=0; } { lastLine=$0; }' catalina.out
```

## Logic Explained

1. **Thread Dump Identification:** The script begins by identifying the start of a new thread dump. It looks for lines matching the date-time pattern `YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS`. When such a line is found, it prepares to write to a new output file.
   
2. **Efficient File Handling:** For each identified thread dump section, the script opens a new file and appends all subsequent lines to it. This file remains open until the start of the next section, reducing the overhead of repeatedly opening and closing files.

3. **Termination Condition:** The script includes logic to stop capturing data for the current file upon encountering specific patterns, such as "object space" following a line containing "PSPermGen". This ensures only relevant data is extracted.

## Analyzing the Extracted Thread Dumps

For comprehensive analysis of the extracted thread dumps, you can use the following tools:

- **[FastThread](https://fastthread.io/):** This tool provides in-depth insights and visualizations, helping you pinpoint performance issues and deadlocks more effectively. Simply upload the extracted thread dump files for analysis.
- **[Drauf's Watson](https://drauf.github.io/watson/):** A viewer that allows you to visualize and interpret thread dumps easily. Drop the extracted thread dump files into Watson for a comprehensive analysis.

By using these tools, you can gain valuable insights into your application's performance and identify the root causes of issues more effectively.

## Conclusion

Using this AWK script can greatly simplify and speed up the process of extracting and analyzing thread dumps from `catalina.out`. 

I hope this information is helpful for someone out there. 🍻


